All analyses were performed using the default paramaters for each piece of software, unless otherwise noted.

###Sequence Quality Assessment

Six Illumina (HiSeq2500) gzipped FASTQ sequencing files (100bp, single-end reads; three biological replicates each, from pre- and post-heat shock) were analyzed with FASTQC (v0.11.2). To perform quality trimming, the files were uncompressed with gunzip and the first 15 bases were trimmed with FASTQ/A Trimmer (v0.0.13.2). Upon trimming completion, the FASTQ files were re-compressed with gzip and re-evaluated with FASTQC.

###Sequence Alignment

A Bowtie (v2.1.0) sequence index was created using the <em>Crassostrea gigas</em> genome FASTA file from Ensembl: ```Crassostrea_gigas.GCA_000297895.1.24.dna_sm.genome.fa```. TopHat (v2.0.13.OSX_x86_64) was used to align the reads to the Bowtie sequence index.  Using TopHat to align reads allows for the identification of putative splice junctions (i.e. intron/exon boundaries) within a genome, potentially leading to ideniftication of alternative splicing events and isoforms. The three pre-heat shock FASTQ files were aligned together to the reference sequence. The same was done for the three post-heat shock FASTQ files. Each TopHat output (one pre-heat shock and one post-heat shock) was directed to a seperate directory. The TopHat analysis produced an output file called ```accepted_hits.bam```, which was used in subsequent steps in the RNA-seq workflow.

###Transcriptome Assembly & Quantification

Cufflinks, a component of the Cufflinks computing package (2.2.1.OSX_x86_64), was used to assemble and quantify the reads from the pre- and post-heat shock, separately. The Cufflinks analysis was performed on each ```accepted_hits.bam``` file from the previous TopHat outputs. Additionally, the Cufflinks analyses utilized the Ensembl general transfer format (.gtf) file associated with the Ensembl genome file for sequence annotation information. This assembly step utilizes the information regarding all transcripts identified with TopHat that align to the genome, including splice variants/isoforms, and to assemble a robust transcriptome that identifies which splic variants/isoforms arose from each gene in the genome. After the assembly, the transcripts are quantified. Each analysis with Cufflinks analysis was directed to new, separate directories and generated a ```transcripts.gtf``` file to be used for combining the two transcriptomes in the next step of the workflow.

###Merge Transcriptomes

Using Cuffmerge, another component of the Cufflink software, the two ```transcripts.gtf``` files from the Cufflinks process and the Ensembl reference genome gtf file were merged together, and the output file, ```merged.gtf```, was sent to a new directory. The ```merged.gtf``` file was used in the subsequent step of the analysis pipeline. Cuffmerge functions to create a master transcriptome, incorporating reference transcripts for annotation.

###Quantifying Gene and Transcript Expression

Gene and transcript expression was determined using Cuffquant, another component of the Cufflinks software package. The separate alignment files (```accepted_hits.bam```) produced by Cufflinks were used in conjuction with the ```merged.gtf``` file generated by Cuffmerge. Each was run separately and the output file (```abundances.cxb```) was directed to a different output directory and given a unique name.  These two .cxb files were used in the subsequent Cuffdiff step.

###Differential Gene Expression

Differential gene expression was calculated using the Cuffidiff package of the Cufflinks software set. Both .cxb files generated by Cuffmerge and the Ensembl genome .gtf file were used as inputs. Cuffdiff calculates differential gene expression between multiple samples and assesses statistical differences between expression levels. Gene expression differences are expressed in fold-changes relative to the other sample(s). Additionally, the Cuffdiff output also contains annotation information for transcripts such as common gene names and location within the genome. Cuffdiff also groups isoforms originating from the same gene, based on transcription start sites (TSS).


